Post mortem 2026-07-08 (#574)
openSUSE/obs-landing: _posts/deployments/2026-07-08-post-mortem.md

---
layout: post
title: "Post-mortem: Service under excessive load"
category: deployments
author: the OBS Team
---

On July 8th, the Open Build Service (OBS) experienced a service degradation.

> **Impact:** Users weren't able to use service consistently, experiencing timeouts and general source degradation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Impact:** Users weren't able to use service consistently, experiencing timeouts and general service degradation.
```

Author: Fixed

## Detection

> The issue first generated alerts at 03:46 in the morning. The team learned about the issues at the start of their work day.

Reviewer: Not sure how our work day is relevant for this...

Author: To help the reader understand why there is a few hours gap between alerts and incident

Reviewer: Not sure I want to explain this but okay :)

> The issue was first reported by users in the early hours of the morning. The team learned about the issues at the start of their work day.

Reviewer: Not quite sure what you want to say with this. The first alert occured 03:46 this night...

Author: Changed it to mention the alert instead

## Root Cause

> A small set of IP ranges triggered a Distributed Denial of Service attack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Someone... (we are trying hard to stay polite) ran a [Distributed Denial of Service](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Denial-of-service_attack) attack on our service.
```

Author: Avoided the ellipsis and parenthesis to make sure this post does not look like a rant

## Resolution

> We identified a pattern in endpoints and applied limits to IPs targeting those.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We discovered a pattern in the malicious requests and applied limits to requests showing this pattern.
```

Author: Applied

> A subset of IP ranges triggered a Distributed Denial of Service attack. The attack became exceptionally impactful as the endpoints being hit were particularly time consuming and resource heavy to load.

Reviewer: Its always a subset of IP ranges, we never have only malicious traffic.

The latter part of the sentence is also not true...

Author: Changed the wording to make this clearer, also removed the second sentence

### Action Items

> * Better track and adapt to bad behaviour across IP ranges

Reviewer: You just made this up? Or do you mean something specific?

Author: I meant what Darix mentioned with stick tables

Reviewer: This is some optimization. The effect for OBS is the same...

Author: Then I'm not sure if there are action items, it's not that we can reasonably avoid being ddosed

Reviewer: We already took action, if there is no follow up needed then there are no action items.

> After initially blocking legitimate bot IPs traffic, we reverted that and identified a pattern in endpoints and applied limits to IPs targeting those instead.

Reviewer: I wouldn't mention the "wrong" step in between. The question that people have that we try to answer is "How did you resolve this?"

Author: Removed, only mentioning the actual resolution

## Lessons Learned

> * Make sure to block the ranges causing the most traffic, not the individual IPs with the most traffic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Distributed** DoS means a reasonable amount of traffic from an unreasonable amount of distinct IPs
```

Author: Applied

> * Better track and adapt to bad behaviour across IP ranges

Reviewer: Rate limits do not help with DDoS...

Author: Removed

> * Check the most resource heavy endpoints for signs of increased traffic, as it has the most potential for taking up instances

Reviewer: Not sure what you are trying to say here?

Author: This was a part of detection, we had a significantly increased load on long running endpoints (rdiff or file read for instance) which matched each other. It took up instances in the process.

## Timeline (All Time in UTC)
- 2026-07-08 01:46: Alert reporting high number of app instances

> - 2026-07-08 07:23: Incident reported to the team

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 2026-07-08 07:23: Users started to reported problems
```

Author: Applied

> ## Timeline (All Time in UTC)

Reviewer: You miss alerts in the timeline.

Author: Added the initial alerts

- 2026-07-08 07:25: Incident announced
- 2026-07-08 07:37: DDoS identified
- 2026-07-08 07:59: Gathered up IPs ranges
- 2026-07-08 08:20: Forwarded IPs to buildops
- 2026-07-08 09:09: New block list deployed by buildops

> - 2026-07-08 09:09: Block list rolled back

Reviewer: Why?

Author: Explained it better

> - 2026-07-08 11:32: Deployed a regex to block bot requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 2026-07-08 11:32: We identified a certain pattern in the malicious traffic and blocked requests that match this pattern
```

Author: Applied
